North Korea fired an intercontinental ballistic missile into waters off Japan in the early hours of Wednesday morning in what was believed to be its longest-range test yet, escalating already high tensions with the US.
Kim Jong-un’s rogue regime launched the missile, its first for more than two months, in the middle of the night and it flew for around 620 miles, reaching an altitude of 2,800 miles, and splashing down 53 minutes later in the Sea of Japan.
The missile ended up within Japan’s exclusive economic zone, which extends 200 nautical miles from its coast.
In response to the test, Donald Trump, the US president, said: “It is a situation that we will handle. We will take care of it.” He offered no further details.
The missile reached a greater altitude than any North Korea has previously tested, James Mattis, the US defence secretary, said.
He said the test showed North Korea wanted to threaten "anywhere in the world basically" and "certainly the US".
'We will take care of it', Trump on North Korea missile launch.
Mr Trump spoke to Sinzo Abe, the Japanese prime minister, after the test. The two leaders agreed that China needed to play an increased role to tackle the crisis.
In a phone call the leaders "agreed to strengthen our deterrence capability against the North Korean threat," said Yasutoshi Nishimura, Japan's deputy chief cabinet secretary.
Mr Abe described the launch as a "violent act" that "can never be tolerated", while Moon Jae-in, the South Korean president, said the test was a "serious threat" to global peace.
Boris Johnson, the Foreign Secretary called on North Korea to "change course".
"This is not the path to security and prosperity for the North Korean people. DPRK regime must change course," Mr Johnson said.
The UN Security Council has scheduled an emergency meeting for Wednesday to discuss the provocation.
Japanese Defence Minister Itsunori Onodera said it was judged to be ICBM class given its lofted trajectory.
"If these numbers are correct, then if flown on a standard trajectory rather than this lofted trajectory, this missile would have a range of more than 13,000 km (8,100 miles) ... Such a missile would have more than enough range to reach Washington, D.C., and in fact any part of the continental United States," the US-based Union of Concerned Scientists said.
However, it was unclear how heavy a payload the missile was carrying, and it was uncertain if it could carry a large nuclear warhead that far, the nonprofit science advocacy group added.
The test came just days after Mr Trump added North Korea to America’s list of state sponsors of terror and unveiled new sanctions targeting its shipping, moves Pyongyang had called a “serious provocation and violent infringement”.
It came weeks after Mr Trump returned from a tour of Asia where he sought to rally support for clamping down on North Korea’s economy.
Hours before the launch, officials in Hawaii said wailing sirens last heard more than 20 years ago would sound for 60 seconds at more than 400 locations on the first working day of each month, starting in December. In the event of a real attack, the sirens would give Hawaiians 12 to 15 minutes of warning before impact. Richard Rapoza, Hawaii’s emergency management spokesman, said: “We stopped using them in the mid-Nineties after the Cold War ended.”
The new siren tests were to be accompanied by public service announcements urging residents to “get inside, stay inside and stay tuned”. Announcing the tests, Mr Rapoza said a single 150-kiloton weapon detonated over Pearl Harbor, on the main island of Oahu, would be expected to kill 18,000 people and injure 120,000.
After firing missiles at a rate of up to three per month since April, North Korea had paused its launches since Sept 15, when one passed over Japan’s northern Hokkaido island. Pyongyang has been working to develop nuclear-tipped intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of hitting the US.
Washington has said that all options are on the table to deal with North Korea’s nuclear programme, including military ones, but that it prefers a peaceful solution.
Mr Trump has repeatedly pressed China, the North’s main ally and neighbour, to step up sanctions on Pyongyang. But North Korea has given no indication it is willing to give up its nuclear ambitions, claiming it needs to defend itself against what it claims are US plans to invade.